---
layout: post
date:   2019-05-30
comments: true
title: "Mixed feelings about being programmer in Moldova"
---

This is just a personal rant on the current situation.  

Moldova is a third world country, Moldova is a very poor country. In the capital - Chishinau, on average you earn ~500 euros per month. Than's bearable but basically not enough. Not enough to feel yourself steady on your legs so to speak.  

On the other side if you an IT "specialist", lets use this vague term, then you can earn from ~1k euros per month. Than's a huge deal!  
Than is why so many people are "getting" into IT - pure survivial instincts - you want to make a decent living in Moldova, you **have** to go into IT. It is easy? I think yes. A lot of people shamelessy confirm that they got into IT because of money. And this happens not only in Moldova, the same situation is happening in Ucraine, Russia.

And you know I do not blame those people, I guess that is totally okay. I'm myself a self-taught programmer and whilst I knew that IT pays off pretty well I came into the industry because I really love programming. I really love it even when it is painful, event when I have to eat shit all day long and feel helpless and hopeless. I love it when I have to argue with my team lead which is dump af. I love it even though it gave me unhealable dark circles under my eyes.  

I always wanted to be a part of something big, something meaningful but I guess it is not quite possible here in Moldova, here is why.  

Lots and lots of outsource legacy projects with horrible clients. You are just a cheap code monkey, nobody cares to listen to you and agree that we need testing, documentation, proper deploy procedure and etc. Nobody gives a fuck. Seriously.  

You have no time to write documentation, to maintain it, no time for testing. It is cheaper just to file a new bug in Jira and let the monkey fix it. You do not understand some piece of domain logic? Something is not clear and nobody seems to know what is happening in that procedure?Go and fucking reverse engeneer it up to the last bit, you fucking dumbass! You hourly rate is so cheap, nobody cares about your suffering.  

My god, what shit have I seen... Probably the most fucked up shit was an artisanal PHP project of 3m lines of codes with lots of copy-paste and no info at all, not testing, not documentation, and variables in french and database with 900+ tables, literally!   

That shit is hard, if I could I'd cry myself to sleep each night. Thanks to my wondefull wife for support.  


But you know what is the worst? Probably not even a client that exploits you but your colleagues. Lots of them are here just for money.  
They do not fucking care about being a good specialist, about making a difference, about growing professionally. They. Just. Do. Not. Give. A. Flying. Fuck.  

Oh and the management! It is so fucking mediocre.  
It is rare privilege to meet a good, organized, compassionate manager that knows her work. I think I know just one, others are just a fucking scam along with apologetic piece-of-shit monkey-for-hire coders that do not even think to evolve. My god, and if you work in one of the major moldavian companies, you probably can watch a lot of gut wretching corporate bullshit. I've seen a lot. I mean it.  

And where are good developers and managers? Mostly they all fuck off from this country, like everybody else.  

So this rant seems to be very depressing, but I believe it reflects current state of reality.

Honestly I feel ashemed to be a programmer in Moldova simply because I see no value in my work and that is very depressing.


